**Authors:** L. Liu, B. Zhang and C. Hyeon

**Title:** Extracting multi-way chromatin contacts from Hi-C data

**Venue:** PLOS Computational Biology

**Year:** 2021

**Citations:** 15

**Aim:** 
The nature of gene expression is controlled by the cooperative and competitive interactions of multiple loci (think: promoters and enhancers) and mediated by transcription factors.  The nature of directly approaching this problem in the wet lab through direct methods such as chromosome tracing (microscopy-based), 3way-4C (ligand-based) and GAM (ligand-free) is the inherently sparse nature of the data with respect to n-body contacts; their signal tends to blend into the background noise.
This paper proposes a method for meeting the statistical challenge of predicting such multi-way chromatin contact probabilities (n-body, n > 2) from pair-wise Hi-C data. They intend to do so by integrating principles of polymer physics into their model with an algorithm derived from the Heterogeneous Loop Model (HLM).

**Conclusion:** 
To create their model, they first used a polymer model to generate a "stiffness" matrix, which was assessed against a fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) dataset reported by Takei et al. Then,  the contact probabilities are predicted from pairwise through generalization into n-body model. When comparing the results of this method to those of methods representative of experimental approaches (Tri-C, MC-4C and SPRITE), the association between pair-wise contacts and mutli-way contacts was found to be "more complicated than intuition." 


**How does what they're saying inform this project:** 
Because this model is based on polymer physics, it is prone to fall apart with respect to predictions for inter-chromosomal contacts. As a result, the statistical methods here are limited in their application to this project. What is relevant to consider for our project is the use of probabilities instead of counts (raw, normalized, or compared to the expect). This is the direction we set out to visualize, though we are sticking to pair-wise contacts for the time being.
