**Author:** S. L’Yi, Q. Wang, F. Lekschas and N. Gehlenborgson

**Title:** Gosling: A Grammar-based Toolkit for Scalable and Interactive Genomics Data Visualization

**Venue:** IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics

**Year:** 2022

**Citations:** 29

**Aim:** 
The authors set out to create "a grammar for interactive and scalable genomics data visualization."
Challenges of creating such a grammar:
* multi-scale
* multi-focus
* multi-modal

The authors built their new grammar on top of an existing web-based genomics visualization platform. This extended its ability to use common data formats. They also aimed to make designing such graphics easier for domain scientists (ie. you shouldn't have to be very code savvy to create visualizations from data). The benefit of this approach over others, as stated by the authors, is that "grammar-based approaches have been proposed to overcome the limitations of template-based approaches and increase the expressiveness of visualization tools". They also noted that semantic zoom is a high priority for genomics data. For example, protein sequences versus secondary structure and so on require drastically different visualization modes. 


**Conclusion:** In this paper, these researchers laid out a grammar that is tailored to the needs of genomics visualization in the same spirit as Wilkinson's "Grammar of Graphics" (whose most widely known implemention is likely Hadley Wickham's ggplot2). 


**How does what they're say inform this project:** Their framework for moving from prototyping to generalized method of displaying information in the way proposed models best practices with respect to the model we are developing. It also gives us a framework for understanding where in the "semantic zoom" perspective our method may fit (more micro than current Hi-C visualization techniques but more macro than, say, base-pair versus base-pair contact matrices, which don't currently exist but present an extreme example). Following their model would allow for integration with other types of visualized data, which fits our ultimate goal of integrating said data in an overarching, probability-based mathematical model. While that may be beyond the scope of the current project, it is relevant to the broader context within which it sits.
