**Author:**  Lyu, Hongqiang, Liu, Erhu and Wu, Zhifang

**Title:** Comparison of normalization methods for Hi-C data

**Venue:** BioTechniques

**Year:** 2020

**Citations:** 23

**Aim:** 
In order to account for systemic bias prior to analysis of Hi-C data, contact matrices are normalized using any one of many methods. The authors of this paper set out to compare multiple aspects of six such methods and come with recommendations for choosing a method based on the use case. They note that these methods can be classified as either explicit (rooted in probability models) or implicit (derived predominantly through matrix balancing and transformation) approaches, most of which are applied to individual samples.

**Conclusion:** 
The researchers looked at five implicit and one explicit models for normalization and compared them across ten categories. Examples of two of these categories are resolution and the "distance stratum".
==Resolution== has an impact, with some methods more sensitive than others, yet are still used at multiple resolutions. 
Normalization methods do consider the structure of chromosomes, namely the =="distance stratum"==, applying a decay model based on polymer modeling that intuits basepairs further away from each other on the same chromosome are less likely to interact, with basepairs after some distance apart interacting as if they were on different chromosomes. This model does not hold for such pseudo-trans- (or "real" trans-) interactions.
Overall, the "best" method to use seems to be *multiHiCcompare* with the caveat that the multiple comparison route requires quite a bit of memory and may be untenable. ICE may be a good stand-in. but does loose some fidelity at higher resolutions. Other methods either require data in addition to the matrices or are more limited in the range of resolutions to which they can be successfully applied.

**How does what they're saying inform this project:** 
The paper notes: "Since heat map is the primary means of overall graphical presentation of Hi-C data, an intuitive comparison of texture between the heat maps of raw and normalized contact matrices is fundamental."
Consideration of the normalization method is foundational to maintaining the integrity of the data when visualized. When deciding how to normalize our data, we did not utilize the built in methods. Instead, we applied our own normalization method to the post-binning raw count data to score the strength of interaction between two genes.
We looked at several intuitive ways of doing so, all based on the lengths of the two genes in question, rather than on the overall count. This makes intuitive sense as the potential of an interaction between two genes is dependent on the number of basepairs available to interact. That is, the same raw count of interactions on a short gene is more likely signal than on a gene ten or twenty times as long. Given our context is local rather than global, it follows that a local rather than global normalization approach be taken. This normalization method was used to compare all subsets of potential of gene-gene pairs in a larger project for which this method is providing visualization.
