**Author:** X. Shi, M. Li, O. Hunter, B. Guetti, A. Andrew, E. Stommel, et al.

**Title:** Estimation of environmental exposure: interpolation, kernel density estimation or snapshotting

**Venue:** Annals of GIS

**Year:** 2019

**Citations:** 24

**Aim:** 
The aim of this publication is to discuss three methods of estimating environmental exposure from the type of data necessary, the mathematic methods, and the output.
Suggestion for when each method might be appropriate
Two of the methods are "standard"–kernel density estimation (KDE) and interpolation–and the third, snapshotting, was so named by the researchers to address a similar, but distinct, statistical method. The authors also describe specific use cases by example for each method.


**Conclusion:** 
The authors outline the three methods, mathematically and through practical application. Important distinctions include: spatial and temporal samples, which are described by interpolation and snapshotting, respectively; and modeling the completion of the spreading process versus a state during the spreading process, the former described by KDE and the latter by snapshotting. A well constructed table is given to summarize the comparisons so that readers may apply the appropriate method to their own research.


**How does what they're saying informs this project:** 
This paper provides background information on three methods used to look at environmental exposure, which is a use of spatiotemporal data similar to the Hi-C dataset we set out to visualize. This paper informed our decision with respect to the statistical methods to use for our current visualization, KDE. The "snapshotting" approach is one we will consider going forward when we add a temporal element to our visualizations. 


